---
layout: post_event
title: Matching storage and recall in spiking neural networks
date: June 17, 2015
img:
speaker: Jean-Pascal Pfister
affiliation: University of Zurich, ETH Zurich
---
Synapses are highly dynamical elements with extraordinary complexity. The up- or down-regulation of synaptic strength depends on more than 100 different interacting proteins and have effects over a wide range of time constants: from milliseconds to hours or days. This stunning complexity seriously challenges the possibility to develop a complete biophysical model of synaptic plasticity. In this talk, I will take another approach and present a normative model of long-term plasticity in the context of sequence learning. Indeed, sequence learning is a general task the brain needs to solve, but it is  unclear what type of biologically plausible learning rule is suited to learn a wide class of spatiotemporal activity patterns in a robust way. I will consider a recurrent network of stochastic spiking neurons composed of both visible and hidden neurons with synapses governed by short-tern plasticity. I will then derive a generic learning rule that is matched to the neural and synaptic dynamics by minimizing an upper bound on the Kullback–Leibler divergence from the target distribution to the model distribution. The derived learning rule is consistent with spike-timing dependent plasticity in that a presynaptic spike preceding a postsynaptic spike elicits potentiation while otherwise depression emerges. In particular, the learning can be matched to the recently proposed voltage-triplet rule. Furthermore, if a synapse is depressive, the corresponding learning rule exhibits suppressive effect (a given spike suppresses the ability of a consequent spike to induce plasticity) whereas in the absence of short-term depression, the learning rule displays the opposite effect (boosting effect). Finally, the learning rule for synapses that target hidden neurons is modulated by a global factor, which shares properties with astrocytes and gives rise to testable predictions.
